Solute carrier membrane transporters are involved in all kinds of cellular nutrient
transportation, energy generation and metabolism as well as other vital biological activities.
They have recently been implicated in pancreatic cancer and other cancer metastasis,
angiogenesis, programmed cell death and proliferation, cell metabolism and chemo-
sensitivity. Solute carrier membrane transporters require detergents to study them
experimentally. Here we report the study of 13 designs for human soluble carrier membrane
transporters using the highly accurate AlphaFold2 predictions of 3D protein structures.
AlphaFold2 has had a profound impact for biology, especially for structural biology. We
present the studies of native soluble carrier transporters with 6-14 transmembrane helical
segments and their water-soluble QTY variants. In the native structures, there are
hydrophobic amino acids leucine (L), isoleucine (I), valine (V) and phenylalanine (F) in the
transmembrane helices. These hydrophobic amino acids are systematically replaced by
hydrophilic amino acids glutamine (Q), threonine (T) and tyrosine (Y). Thus, these QTY
variants become water-soluble. We also present the superposed structures of these native
soluble carrier transporters and their water-soluble QTY variants. The superposed structures
show remarkable similarity with RMSD ~1Å-4Å despite &gt;46% protein sequence differences in
transmembrane helices. We also show the differences of hydrophobicity patches between
the native soluble carrier transporters and their QTY variants and explain the rationale why
the soluble carrier QTY variants become water-soluble. Our study may further stimulate
designs of water-soluble transmembrane proteins and other aggregated proteins for drug
discovery and biotechnological applications.
